### **Name**

**random\_init(3)** - \[MATHEMATICS:RANDOM\] control multi-image
pseudorandom number generator initialization.

### **Syntax**
```fortran
   call random_init (repeatable, image_distinct)

     subroutine random_init(repeatable, image_distinct)
     logical,intent(in) :: repeatable
     logical,intent(in) :: image_distinct
```
### **Description**

Pseudorandom generators produce a deterministic sequence of numbers
that pass statistical tests that show they appear sufficiently random
to be treated as such. So they are numbers that are generated by a
repeatable computation that appear random if you do know what algorithm
is being used.

To get different sets of random numbers you give them a different starting
point called a "seed"; which is often an array of whole numbers.

External values (often time-related) are frequently used to automatically
generate different seed values so you can get different sequences of
random values without manually generating a seed each time you want a
different set of values.

The standard Fortran procedures do not specify a specific generator
algorithm. If you require a generator that produces the same values or a
specific quality independent of the compiler or platform being used you
will want to use your own generator or review the specific generators used
by your compiler.  There are many packages available for such situations.

But the standard procedures available are sufficient for many use
cases. They consist of **random\_number(3f)**, **random\_seed(3f)**,
and **random\_init(3f)**.

**random\_number(3f)** calls a generator and returns a psuedorandom scalar
or array. This simple-to-use function does not directly define how to
seed or initialize the generator, however. So if you do not call one
of the other two initializer procedures it is implementation dependent
as to whether the initial seed is always the same or changes with each
program start, or whether all images in a parallel program start with
the same seed or unique seeds for each image, for instance.

So you need to either set the seed with **random\_seed(3)** yourself
and optionally the behavior when running in parallel with coarrays with
**random\_init(3f) if you do not want to just depend on your particular
compiler behavior.

**random\_init(3f)**
Initializes the state of the pseudorandom number generator procedure
**random\_number(3f)**. **random\_init**(3f) is equivalent to invoking
**random\_seed(3f)** with no parameters but considers parallel images and
otherwise processor-dependent behaviors as well.

Not every compiler vendor gives a unique seed for random\_seed(),
for example.

The initial behavior of the pseudorandom number generator random\_number()
procedure is processor-dependent if not initialized. Even if initialized
with **random\_seed()**  if a specific seed array is not specified
behavior is still processor-dependent for multiple image codes unless
specific modes are selected with **random\_init()**.

There are four combinations of REPEATABLE and IMAGE_DISTINCT. The behavior
is as follows:

   Case (i) : REPEATABLE=.true.,IMAGE\_DISTINCT=.true.

   PUT different on every invoking image.  In each execution of the
   program with the same execution environment, if the invoking image
   index value in the initial team is the same, the value for PUT shall
   be the same.

   PROGRAM main
   REAL,DIMENSION(1000) :: y
   CALL RANDOM_INIT (REPEATABLE=.TRUE., IMAGE_DISTINCT=.TRUE.)
   CALL RANDOM_NUMBER (y)
   . . .
   END

   After executing the above code, the array y contains a different sequence
   of pseudorandom numbers on each image that executes the code. If the
   program is executed multiple times, for an image that has the same
   image index in the initial team, the value of y is the same each time
   the program is run.

   Consider the following:

   CALL RANDOM_INIT(.TRUE., .TRUE.)

   The sequence of random numbers is repeatable. If the program is
   compiled with -fcoarray=lib and multiple images are instantiated,
   then each image accesses a repeatable distinct sequence of random
   numbers. Technically, the Standard states that a distinct seed is
   used in each image (with the tacit assumption that the sequences
   are distinct, but this is not guaranteed). Also, the repeatability
   is guaranteed for the currently executing image. Rerunning the
   executable does not require the same distinct seeds, but I have
   chose to use the same seeds.

   Case (ii) :  REPEATABLE=.true.,IMAGE\_DISTINCT=.false.

   PUT is the same on every invoking image.
   In each execution of the program with the same execution
   environment, the value for PUT shall be the same.

   Case (iii) : REPEATABLE=.false., IMAGE\_DISTINCT=.true.

   PUT is different on every invoking image.
   Different values for PUT shall be used for subsequent
   invocations, and for each execution of the program.

   Case (iv) : REPEATABLE=.false.,IMAGE\_DISTINCT=.false.

   PUT that is the same on every invoking image.
   Different values for PUT shall be used for subsequent
   invocations, and for each execution of the program.

   the array y contains the same sequence
   of pseudorandom numbers on each image that executes the code. If the
   program is executed multiple times, the value of y is different each
   time the program is run.

   Consider another example:

   PROGRAM main
   REAL,DIMENSION(1000) :: y
   CALL RANDOM_INIT (REPEATABLE=.FALSE., IMAGE_DISTINCT=.FALSE.)
   CALL RANDOM_NUMBER (y)
   . . .
   END

   The pseudorandom number generator used by RANDOM_NUMBER maintains
   a seed on each image that is updated during the execution of
   RANDOM_NUMBER and that can be retrieved or changed by RANDOM_INIT
   or RANDOM_SEED . Computation of the seed from the argument PUT
   is performed in a processor-dependent manner. The value assigned
   to GET need not be the same as the value of PUT in an immediately
   preceding reference to RANDOM_SEED. For example, following execution
   of the statements

In each of these cases, a different processor-dependent value for PUT
shall result in a different sequence of pseudorandom numbers.

### **Arguments**

  - **repeatable
    : If .true., the seed is set to a processor-dependent value
    that is the same each time **random_init(3f)** is called from the
    same program execution (or the same image???).

    The sequence of random numbers is different for repeated execution
    of the program.

    If it is .false., the seed is set to a processor-dependent value.

    : when .true. init the seed used by **random\_number**
                  differently on every invoking image.

     If it is .true., the seed is set to a processor-dependent
    value that is the same each time random_init is called from the same
    image.

  - **image\_distinct**

    image_distinct
    : If .true., the seed is set to a processor-dependent
    value that is distinct from the seed set by a call to random_init
    in another image.

    If it is .false., the seed is set to a value that does
    depend which image called random_init.

    IMAGE_DISTINCT is clearly meant for a program that uses co-arrays
    where upon execution multiple images are instantiated. If a program
    does not use co-arrays or only a single image is instantiated,
    then IMAGE_DISTINCT is irrelevant.

### **Examples**

Sample program:

```fortran
program demo_random_init
   ! random_number(3f) on this invoking image will generate a sequence
   ! that differs form other images that invoke a similar statement, as
   ! well as being different on subsequent program execution.
   call random_init (repeatable=.false., image_distinct=.true.)

end program demo_random_init
Example

program test_random_seed
implicit none
real x(3), y(3)
   call random_init   (repeatable=.true., image_distinct=.true.)
   call random_number (x)
   call random_init   (repeatable=.true., image_distinct=.true.)
   call random_number (y)
   ! x and y are the same sequence
   if (any(x /= y)) stop "x(:) and y(:) not all equal"
end program test_random_seed
```
  Results:
```text
```
### **Standard**

Fortran 2018 and later

### **See Also**

[*_random\_seed**(3)](RANDOM_SEED),
[*_random\_init**(3)](RANDOM_INIT)

###### fortran-lang intrinsic descriptions (license: MIT) @urbanjost
